---
title:  Running Myself Thin
date:   2016-08-13 20:35:55
image: 100m.jpg
---


I went from being an 18 stone 16 year old to an 11 stone 18 year old, shedding 7 stones but I didn’t stop there. Every year of my life, and I’m now 26, I have gotten leaner and fitter and I won’t let this trend end any year soon.

But here’s the thing, 18 stone people hate running. 18 stone people really, really love biscuits and chocolate bars. I got a paper round to help me loose weight in high school and what did I do with my money? Spent it on 3 chocolate bars I’d eat on my way. What is going on in that person’s mind? That’s the kind of decision a dog would make if it could get a paper round. I like chocolate, I should eat more of it. It’s not a good way to live your life.

One reason I might have done it, besides age, is that chocolate is delicious and offers instant gratification and running is the opposite. A vast journey with endless steps, slow progression, and a whole lot of pain and misery. I once set off running from my house, got to the bottom of my road and turned left onto a route which I can now guess would have been 5K, only to get about 0.2K thoroughly defeated. Not having the motivation to rest and jog back home, I slowly drudged back home, my brief elation that I could be a runner replaced with reality.

I’ve been in that situation over and over again on my way to where I am today. The difference is that I have gotten used to it, pain is interesting in that it leads to transformation. If you keep going you’ll learn to love running but the secret to continual improvement is to continually push toward temporary pain, beyond your limits. I’ve been pushing myself to sprint up the biggest hills around where I live in an attempt to top the hardest Strava segments. As I’ve only been ‘seriously’ running for 6 months this takes a lot of effort to compete with runners much more accomplished than myself, especially when they push back with even faster times!

The thing I’d like to share is that any transformation requires a sustained assault against yourself. If loosing weight is your thing, you don’t even need to start exercising until you’ve lost 90% of it. Your first battle is eating a hell of a lot less food, much healthier food, and fewer snacks, for the rest of your life - that’s what people mean when they say lifestyle change. Introduce exercise as soon as you can and increase intensity over time, don’t resort to unhealthy eating practices (starving, making yourself sick) to compensate for your inactivity. It’s a bit cheesy but I think the new Rocky film Creed with Micheal B Jordan is close to a perfect film and the mantra from that: “One step at a time, one punch at a time, one round at a time” can be applied to just about anything in life. Keep moving towards your goal.

When I was 15 we had to run 100 metres. I remember taking up the position and feeling like I had a good shot of beating some of the nerdiest kids. I was actually pretty competitive at football and tennis and absolutely delusional to boot so as I bent into an Olympian starting position, ears attentive for the starting whistle, I felt like a coiled spring ready to explode up the track. I feel confident in saying that I have good running technique and in the moment I was immersed in executing the perfect start - arms pumping head down, accelerating, raising the head and my body grew to an erect posture - a true sight to behold and the next great British athlete. Soon replaced by the crushing reality that giving it everything I had, I was at a standstill compared to even the next slowest kid. It was like watching a boat race in the arctic in which an unassuming glacier had accidentally been counted as a participant.  By the time I lifted my head up to see everyone finished I was at 20 metres, I panicked and tried to increase my speed - 25 metres. Now it was getting embarrassing and so I took the less embarrassing embarrassment of faking an ankle injury and limping to join my class.

There are all sorts of benefits to making these changes beyond becoming fitter, and healthier. I’ve joined a running club and run in races which is making me more sociable. On my slow training runs I often experience brief periods of bare attention (meditation) which writers like Haruki Murakami have attributed as key to creative thinking, and Ronnie O’Sullivan has used to replace substance abuse. It also gets me off the computer, disconnected and out in the countryside. Just this morning running up a hill and a bird kept flying about 5 yards in front of me and landing and repeating this every time I got close letting, me get closer each time until I ran right past it and it just looked up at me - I could have reached out and picked it up. I see new born lambs, pheasants, amazing views and can be taken back to a place where I feel infinitely youthful, invigorated, and have a smile on my face so wide and genuine that I could never produce on command; I feel like music filling up the wide open spaces. 

As for how this relates to design I have my most free and exciting ideas just before sleep, in the morning shower, or on a long run. Long runs are especially great for allowing your mind to wander and design problems to unpack themselves, or overlooked details to surface. 

I’ve just entered for my 3rd half marathon. I’ve been pushing myself and using the pain (or discomfort from extra hard training) to get faster over the past 4 months. I should be knocking 10+ minutes off of my personal best. Which will put me in good stead for my winter training so that I can be strong for next year, when I can beat all of my 2016 times. That’s a lot more pain, it’s the price I accept for progress, and the other benefits I’ve mentioned are bonuses. Push yourself and depending on where you’re at now, it might take 5 years but you have the ability to be among the best of any thing you put your mind to. 


<br><br>